Real-World Data Collection with SO101 Arm
=====================================================

This document covers hardware setup, dependency installation, and the
teleoperation-based data-collection workflow for the **SO101** 6-DOF arm
within the RLinf framework.

.. note::

   The SO101 is an open-source, 3D-printable 6-DOF manipulator using Feetech
   STS3215 motors. It is the reference low-cost arm in the LeRobot ecosystem.
   RLinf wraps LeRobot's existing Python API (``SO101Follower``,
   ``SO101Leader``) — no separate hardware SDK is needed.

Environment
-----------

**Real-World Environment**

- **Robot**: SO101 6-DOF arm with Feetech STS3215 servos on a USB serial bus.
- **Control**: Joint-space position control in degrees. LeRobot's synchronous
  Python API handles motor communication directly — no distributed controller
  Worker is required.
- **Task**: Joint-space reaching (``SO101PickEnv-v1``). The agent must move
  the arm from a reset configuration to a target joint configuration.
- **Observation**:

  - ``state/joint_position``: 5-D arm joint angles (degrees).
  - ``state/gripper_position``: 1-D gripper opening (degrees).
  - ``frames/camera_0``: placeholder 128×128 RGB frame. Real camera support
    is provided by the LeRobot ``camera_serials`` / ``camera_type`` config
    fields (see :doc:`/rst_source/extending/new_realworld_robot`).

- **Action Space**: 6-dimensional continuous — 5 absolute joint positions +
  1 gripper position, all in degrees.
- **Reward**: Exponential falloff on L2 joint error, saturating at 1.0 within
  a configurable threshold.

Data Collection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Data collection uses **bilateral teleoperation**: a leader arm is physically
moved by a human, and the follower arm mirrors the motion. Both arms connect
via USB serial.

- **Leader**: Reads joint positions from the leader arm every control step
  and forwards them to the follower.
- **Keyboard Control**: Physical keyboard keys ``s`` / → (save episode),
  ``r`` / ← (rerecord / discard), ``q`` / Esc (stop recording). The keyboard
  listener uses the Linux ``evdev`` input layer — no X11 or graphical session
  required (read access to ``/dev/input/event*`` is needed; add the user to
  the ``input`` group or set ``sudo setfacl -m u:$USER:r /dev/input/event*``).
- **Output**: Episodes are saved in LeRobot dataset format under the
  configured ``save_dir``, one timestamped directory per data-collection run.

.. note::

   Once data collection is complete, see :doc:`so101_sft_openpi` for the π₀
   supervised-fine-tuning recipe that consumes the resulting LeRobot-format
   dataset.  RL training on SO101 is planned but not yet validated.


Cameras
~~~~~~~

SO101 data collection supports LeRobot's camera system. Configure up
to two cameras by adding a camera_cfgs dict to the environment
override_cfg.  The type key selects the LeRobot camera backend;
remaining keys are passed directly to the corresponding
:class:`~lerobot.cameras.configs.CameraConfig` subclass.

.. code-block:: yaml

   env:
     eval:
       main_image_key: front      # record "front" as the primary view
       override_cfg:
         camera_cfgs:
           front:
             type: intelrealsense
             serial_number_or_name: "409122274720"
             width: 848
             height: 480
             fps: 30
             use_depth: true          # also reads "front_depth"
           handeye:
             type: opencv
             index_or_path: /dev/video8
             width: 640
             height: 480
             fps: 30

Camera frames are stored in the observation under their configured
names ("front", "handeye", "front_depth") by LeRobot's
SO101Follower.get_observation(). The env forwards them directly
into frames. When use_depth is set on a RealSense camera, an
additional <name>_depth key is emitted in the observation.

When *no* cameras are configured, a single blank camera_0 (128×128)
placeholder is emitted to keep downstream wrappers happy.

Hardware Setup
--------------

.. warning::

   Ensure both follower and leader arms are assembled, powered, and connected
   via USB before starting the script. Verify with ``ls /dev/ttyACM*`` — you
   should see two entries (e.g. ``/dev/ttyACM0`` and ``/dev/ttyACM1``).

   Both arms must be calibrated with LeRobot's calibration tool before use.
   Calibration JSON files are stored under
   ``~/.cache/huggingface/lerobot/calibration/{robots,teleoperators}/so_{follower,leader}/``
   and referenced by the ``calibration_id`` and ``leader_calibration_id``
   config fields.

   The USB serial devices are owned by ``root:dialout``. Ensure the runtime
   user is a member of the ``dialout`` group, or set ``chmod a+rw`` on the
   dev nodes.

Dependency Installation
-------------------------

The SO101 arm uses LeRobot for motor communication. All dependencies are
bundled in the ``so101`` extra:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Clone RLinf
   git clone https://github.com/RLinf/RLinf.git
   cd RLinf

   # Install with the so101 extra
   # For mainland China users, add --use-mirror for faster downloads.
   bash requirements/install.sh embodied --env so101
   source .venv/bin/activate

For environments where LeRobot is already installed (e.g. a shared conda env),
you can install RLinf minimally:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install -e . --no-deps
   pip install ray[default] hydra-core omegaconf evdev imageio[ffmpeg] \
       sortedcontainers icmplib tensorboard torchdata scipy datasets \
       accelerate huggingface_hub filelock psutil

Running the Experiment
-----------------------

Configuration File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The data-collection config is located at
``examples/embodiment/config/realworld_so101_collect_data.yaml``. Key sections:

.. code-block:: yaml

   cluster:
     num_nodes: 1
     component_placement:
       env:
         node_group: so101
         placement: 0
     node_groups:
       - label: so101
         node_ranks: 0
         hardware:
           type: SO101
           configs:
             - port: /dev/ttyACM0                    # follower
               leader_port: /dev/ttyACM1             # leader
               calibration_id: my_awesome_follower_arm
               leader_calibration_id: my_awesome_leader_arm
               node_rank: 0

   runner:
     task_type: embodied
     logger:
       log_path: "../results/so101-collect-data"
       experiment_name: "so101-collect-data"
     num_data_episodes: 4               # stop after this many saved episodes

   env:
     eval:
       max_episode_steps: 10000          # soft cap if no key is pressed
       override_cfg:
         enable_teleop: True
         manual_episode_control_only: True
         auto_calibrate: False           # skip the Lerobot calibration prompt
         success_hold_steps: 1
       data_collection:
         enabled: True
         save_dir: ${runner.logger.log_path}/collected_data
         export_format: "lerobot"
         robot_type: "so101"
         fps: 30

Adjust ``port``, ``leader_port``, ``calibration_id``, and
``leader_calibration_id`` to match your hardware and saved calibration files.

Launch
~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: bash

   cd RLinf

   # Start Ray (single-machine)
   ray start --head --port=6379 --node-ip-address=127.0.0.1 --disable-usage-stats

   # Launch data collection
   python examples/embodiment/collect_real_data.py \
       --config-name realworld_so101_collect_data

On the host machine (the physical keyboard must be connected), the script
listens for the following key presses:

- ``s`` / → — save the current episode and increment the counter
- ``r`` / ← — discard the current episode (immediately resets)
- ``q`` / Esc — stop the entire collection and exit

.. note::

   The keyboard listener reads from the Linux kernel input event layer
   (``/dev/input/event*``). Ensure the runtime user has read access — add
   to the ``input`` group or use an ACL:
   ``sudo setfacl -m u:$USER:r /dev/input/event*``.

Workflow
~~~~~~~~

#. The follower arm moves to its reset pose (``reset_joint_qpos``, default
   ``[0, -45, 90, 0, 0, 45]`` degrees with small random noise on arm joints).
#. Take the leader arm in your hand and demonstrate the desired motion. The
   follower mirrors in real time.
#. Press ``s`` / → to save, ``r`` / ← to discard and restart, or ``q`` / Esc
   to stop.
#. After each episode, the arm auto-resets to the rest pose and the next
   episode begins.

Output Layout
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block::

   <log_path>/
   ├── collected_data/
   │   └── rank_0/
   │       └── run_20260616_191730/            # timestamped per-run
   │           ├── meta/
   │           │   ├── info.json                 # feature spec, fps, episode counts
   │           │   └── tasks.parquet
   │           └── data/
   │               └── chunk-000/
   │                   └── file-000.parquet      # all frames
   └── demos/                                    # RLinf TrajectoryReplayBuffer
       ├── metadata.json
       ├── trajectory_0_*.pt
       ├── trajectory_1_*.pt
       └── ...

Two equivalent copies of the same demonstrations:

- ``collected_data/`` — LeRobot-format dataset, loadable by the SFT training
  pipeline via ``rlinf.data.lerobot_to_buffer.load_lerobot_dataset_to_demo_buffer``.
- ``demos/`` — RLinf ``TrajectoryReplayBuffer`` auto-save (PyTorch tensors),
  useful for debugging.

On exit, the arm is parked at its rest pose with torque enabled, actively
holding position until the script is re-launched.

Testing the Setup (Optional)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Verify that the imports and environment work in dummy mode:

.. code-block:: bash

   python -c "
   from rlinf.envs.realworld.so101.tasks.so101_pick import SO101PickEnv
   import rlinf.envs.realworld.so101.tasks  # registers SO101PickEnv-v1
   import gymnasium as gym
   env = gym.make('SO101PickEnv-v1', override_cfg={'is_dummy': True},
                  worker_info=None, hardware_info=None, env_idx=0)
   obs, _ = env.reset()
   print('OK — dummy env works:', list(obs['state'].keys()))
   env.close()
   "

Troubleshooting
----------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Problem
     - Solution
   * - ``ImportError: No module named 'lerobot.robots.so_follower'``
     - Install the ``so101`` extra: ``bash requirements/install.sh embodied --env so101``
       or install LeRobot >= v0.5.1 (the first tag containing the SO101 API).
   * - ``Serial port '/dev/ttyACM0' not found``
     - Check ``ls /dev/ttyACM*``. On Linux, ensure the user is in the
       ``dialout`` group.
   * - Robot doesn't move after ``send_action``
     - Calibrate the arm with LeRobot's calibration tool first. Verify the
       ``calibration_id`` in the YAML matches a saved calibration JSON.
   * - ``gym.error.UnregisteredEnv``
     - The tasks ``__init__.py`` must be imported. Verify ``so101_tasks``
       is listed in ``rlinf/envs/realworld/__init__.py``.
   * - Keyboard ``s/r/q`` does nothing
     - ``evdev`` cannot read ``/dev/input/event*``. Ensure the user is in the
       ``input`` group or the devices have an ACL. Re-login after group
       changes; or run ``sudo setfacl -m u:$USER:r /dev/input/event*``.
   * - ``FileExistsError`` on second data-collection run
     - This was a bug in earlier versions where ``create()`` was called on
       an existing directory. Fixed by timestamped run directories.
   * - Arm feels "frozen" or "stiff" after script exits
     - The arm is parked at rest with torque enabled (active hold). This is
       normal — the STS3215 servos have high gear-train friction even when
       torque-disabled. Re-launching the script restores the live state.